---
Name: "Empires of EVE: Volume 1"
Entry Created: 2024-01-01
Author: Andrew Groen
tags:
  - book
---
Presented by the author as a work of investigative journalism. I believe it. There are many detailed accounts that couldn’t have come from anyone but a primary source. Even if the author was playing Eve Online during this period, he couldn’t have been present for all of the stories that he’s presented. The book includes many integrated maps that paint the strategic and political landscape in which the events take place. The presentation is as straight-faced as any history book I’ve read. By that comparison it’s interesting that this is a “contemporary history” book. The author is documenting things that happened only a few years ago. I’ve never run across this sort of contemporary history on any other subject.

This book was fascinating and for different reasons than I thought it would be. I expected it to be the work of an outsider, where everything would be given context based on its place in the real world. How much real money was lost in a battle. How successful the game was commercially. It wasn’t. It was the work of someone who truly believes that this world was an alternate reality and that the events which took place there had meaning unto themselves. It never blinked at the camera or took on the subjects with anything less than a straight face.

I learned more about the forces that drive war as a result of this book. War is for territory and what it can offer. It’s also about opposing philosophies and historical friction between peoples. A great empire evolved because it built the mightiest war machine. That war machine was made up of people, of industry, of strategy. Then that great empire was dethroned by outsiders. The Goonswarm felt like it violated something sacred when it first entered the picture. It didn’t play by the rules in the magic circle. It wasn’t held together by a desire to excel in the game. But it held together all the same, and it came to challenge and then dethrone that unbreakable empire. It functioned like religion did during the Crusades. It bound people not by politics but by something outside and orthogonal to politics. It bound people who had only hatred and a desire to extinguish those not of their religion.

I understand better why espionage is so critical. It’s the “side channel attack” of war. While armies are trading shots, spies and saboteurs are stacking dominoes in shadows, pushing them over at the moment when they’ll ripple and fall in the most damaging place possible. The espionage in EVE was both inside the game and outside. It didn’t violate the magic circle so much as expand the magic circle to cover more of reality.

There were great leaders in the game, as great perhaps as many real leaders. It was real people that flocked to the banners of those great leaders. Those leaders orchestrated true empires. Through force of personality, and through promise of status, those leaders called real people to battles inside of this alternate universe.

Propaganda played a key role in the game. Propaganda requires hidden information, and EVE provided that sandbox. Propaganda kept players believing their alliance was on the attack when it was really on the ropes. Propaganda brought in new players to a shared vision. It gave role players a rally point, and why wouldn’t that apply to real life? It gave people more than activities -- it gave them causes.

The author points out a few times that the true currency of the game was “fun”. The most successful leaders gave their players “fun”. Fun was protection of territory so that they could engage in their preferred game activities for some, but it was open war for others. There is probably a corollary here to the real word. It feels on the tip of my brain what it might be. Is “fun” in EVE the same as “happiness” or “comfort” as the equivalent currency in the real world?

There were a few moments of genuine surprise and amazing strategy as well as tactics. The “honeypot” system comes to mind as a work of strategy, where one army used misdirection and limited information on the other -- drew an attack on an empty shipyard when the intent was to attack a valuable one. Even more bold by the defender, when you consider that there was active espionage that could have undone everything. There were real tactics, too -- specific ship builds as counters and specific army compositions, the careful deployment of super-weapons both as deterrents and as implements of destruction. Logistics also played a huge part in the wars. Those who could resupply better usually won the long battles and eventually the war of attrition. There was room for kingmaking factions. And there was the concept of a failure cascade, where one stone starts rolling down the hill, knocks two more out of place, knocks a boulder out of place, and eventually there’s a landslide that ends in rubble where an alliance used to be.