---
Name: Age of Empires 4
Entry Created: 2023-06-01
Genre:
  - RTS
tags:
  - game
---
Played about an hour through Game Pass. I was hooked in by the vague understanding that this is a “4X RTS”, which is broadly how I think of [[Rise of Nations]] or [[Sins of a Solar Empire]] (two of my favorite games from their era of PC gaming). The presentation is fairly lush with high production values in animation of units, buildings, and their tasks. I went through the tutorial campaign which spanned five missions. The UI was suitable for television screens, and the control scheme was sufficiently complex to make me believe that it is a “full-fat” PC RTS experience. I would not describe the UI as beautiful, but definitely functional. It uses lots of icons, much text onscreen at any time, large portions of the game view covered with UI. This leads me to believe that it’s a PC-first experience that has been made playable via controller with workmanlike sensibilities. Function and utility, not beauty. I would not be surprised if it offers cross-play between controller players and PC players, and I suspect that the control scheme would be up to the challenge once you’ve practiced a little.

I do believe based on the time that I played it is heavier on the RTS than the 4X, which probably means it’s not for me. It has a significant portion of the control scheme and UI that would be useful for micromanaging units, including many slots for command groups, a dedicated controller face button for triggering hero powers, and multiple methods to both select and deselect certain units. The tutorial does take you through at least one “age-up” based on tech level, but based on the historical setting I suspect the ageing-up or tech’ing-up is more a visual representation of tech tree status during a match than anything else. The years represented in campaign select look like medieval through renaissance. (This is neither my area of historical expertise nor an area I spent a lot of time digesting in the game.)

Also some oddity in the onramp of the tutorial. The first tutorial mission literally teaches you to pan and rotate camera via the left thumbstick and right thumbstick, issue orders via the generic order button (A), and maybe select a single unit. The second tutorial mission then gives you command groups and rock-paper-scissors units, so far so good, until the final phase where it reveals a group of enemies and tells you “go nuts, don’t forget to send your units in groups against the enemy weaknesses”. At that point in the tutorial flow I was not yet capable of issuing commands with that degree of precision at all, much less doing it confidently. I sat for a couple of minutes trying to figure out if the mission had bugged and I’d missed a tutorial stage, or if there was a “real time with pause” feature. I couldn’t possibly physically or mentally execute yet what it was telling me I should be able to do with the controller, although I do acknowledge I had all the individual ingredients available to me. I ended up just mass attack-moving my unit blob and it worked out fine. But that again tipped my hand that this was an RTS first, and ultimately probably not for me in that case.