---
Name: Bloom
Entry Created: 2024-06-01
Genre:
  - Visual Novel
tags:
  - game
---
I can see this being something I enjoy having loaded into memory on the Playdate, and popping into from time to time to harvest my flowers. It’s, again, aesthetically matched to the Playdate. So far it looks like it’s taking a standard genre (the farm sim), and skinning it to something that matches the intended audience of hipster adults (running a flower-growing business on the roof of your crappy apartment building where you need to pay rent, while navigating a gay relationship and the approval of others).

Looks like there are some visual novel elements of the game as well, and the character you play is authored, not something you can craft. Their story, including the dialogue, is not exactly uncomfortable for me; rather, it’s eye-rolling. But it makes me think of how so many games do feature people “like me” and perhaps I’m having the experience that a much broader swath of humanity has had for years when they jump into a video game, and the authored player character is not “like me”.

I’ve continued to chip away at this game over time. I am impressed by its quality overall. The only mechanic outside of the simplistic farming is the ability to pick one of two responses in text message conversations with other characters. This is disproportionately effective as a tool for engaging me with characters I wouldn’t otherwise care about or want to embody. I’m not even sure the responses make any difference. They are often slightly different, but not enough that they’d provoke any different response from the recipient. On the other hand, they do allow for a surprising amount of expressiveness in playing the character of… ah, shoot. I can’t remember the name of the player agent character. Anyway, there is often a chance when responding to her parents where the character can choose between something like “OK, gotcha” and “Thanks, love you”. I choose based on the way I want the character to respond. Overall this mechanic couldn’t be simpler, but it elevates the conversations from passive to active engagement. This also reminds me of the way my brother described role-playing Geralt in the [[The Witcher 3]]. You can influence outcomes and shape the way he responds in dialogue, but you can’t make him into something he’s not. Ultimately he’s a witcher and has relationships that matter to him, and while you can steer within the boundaries of who he is, he never becomes a blank slate player agent.

The character’s use of different tones when responding to different people is also a deft piece of characterization. The text messages are written very formally and politely to people like her neighbor, more familiar with her mom and dad, and very slang and shorthand with Ai and Tomoko. It’s a peek into the complex inner world of this character and the web of relationships she maintains.

There is a noticeable disconnect between the primary game mechanic of farming, and the story that is unfolding through text messages. The main character stresses a lot about having money for rent, all while I’m steadily and easily paying off exponentially increasing rent costs. I’ve already paid off a 1.2 million yen rent payment, while reading text messages about the character needing 200k yen from her parents and wrestling with her surprisingly-unsuccessful flower business. The disconnect is so stark that there’s either going to be some kind of subversion later on which ties it together, or it’ll just have to be something that doesn’t work with the story. At the same time, the farming sim conceit does keep me popping back into the game from time to time, which itself allows the game to dole out new bits of story over time and be reasonably certain I’ll return to see it.

There also appear to be things happening in the character’s life between text message vignettes, like movie night at her apartment. These aren’t shown in any way. The only way you know that they happen is because you’ll get the next set of text messages and they are clearly referring to an event that could have happened on screen. Turns out, this is a slick way to handle what otherwise would have been another demand on art and event scripting, but it doesn’t actually lose much effect. In other words, if I’d seen the movie night play out in sprites moving around in the apartment, would I have cared? Probably not. It would have locked me into a pixel cinematic without giving me any more real story than I’m picking up through the text messages.

The text messaging conceit is a clever nod to the drop-in and drop-out nature that I use the playdate for. Text messaging is a naturally asynchronous method of communication, so it makes perfect sense to drop in and out.

I’m also appreciating more and more the benefit of tying the gardening and the text messaging framework to the realtime nature of this game. I will go off and play other games on the device, but pop back into Bloom every once in a while to see if I’ve received any new messages and to harvest/replant my garden. It gives the game a slow-burn longevity that reminds me of [[Animal Crossing - New Horizons|Animal Crossing]]. The only thing that detracts from this style is something else it shares with Animal Crossing -- a distressingly-long load time from the moment you select the game in the console’s library to the time it accepts any input from you.

As I re-read some of my earliest comments, I have softened on my initial stance that the dialogue induces eye rolls. Ultimately the dialogue has turned out to create very human characters. They poke fun at each other lightly at times but aren’t overly sensitive either. They confess their struggles to their close confidants, but don’t devolve into one-note dejected characters. There’s also a sense of being guarded (helped by the formal style of those text messages) with people they have just met, and that’s shared to a degree with the parents, which makes it all the more painful to watch. I’ve ended up being very impressed with the writing which has created some rich characters.

BLAM. There’s been a thread running for several days between Midori and Ai. Ai wants to go to a concert together, and Midori is reluctant. Midori says she’ll buy tickets. A little while later Ai asks again, Midori says she hasn’t yet but confirms that she’ll do it. A little while later again, Ai asks if Midori purchased the tickets, and… THERE IS NO OPTION TO RESPOND AT ALL. The cadence I’ve been watching for days is completely disrupted, of a text, a response, a volley of back and forth which ends in a completed conversation. The lead-up mechanically and narratively to this moment made it powerful. I actually had a jaw-drop moment when I read the text, prepared myself mentally for what my sheepish responses would be, and then didn’t get that option at all. I had a feeling that Midori hadn’t bought the tickets yet, but I didn’t expect her to ghost Ai over it.

Today, I pulled the game out not to replant flowers, but to check in and see if the story has advanced. What a magic trick. Complete inversion of my previous play, where I just played to make the number go up and clicked through the story to make the notification go away. This time I was glad you see the notification, and planted some flowers while I was there.

Many days later, I'm starting to see through the magic trick in that conversations don't branch at all. Or branching isn't the word. There's no change in the response based on what you pick, as far as I can tell. But it's amazing how powerful the trick still is at engaging you.

Turns out the dramatic twist went no where, which is disappointing. I also just realized I was off by an order of magnitude on how much the next garden upgrade costs, which decreases my desire to chase it. That along with the de-escalating story stakes have decreased my investment in the game. On the other hand, the ankle high barrier to entry each time I pick up the Playdate means I probably won't abandon the game just yet.