---
Name: Farm RPG
Entry Created: 2024-06-01
Genre:
  - Idle
tags:
  - game
---
A mobile game that combines the exploitative mechanics of exponential growth from idle and clicker games, with the thematic trappings of a farm or life sim. This is a weird game. It describes itself as “text-based” which is not strictly accurate since there are lots of individual sprites for all kinds of items and activities, but it was a smart way to set the tone for a game which is ultimately just playing a clickable spreadsheet. It is most similar to the persistent browser-based games of the late 90s and early 2000s. It winks at the camera occasionally with achievement names and item descriptions, which is annoying. But in general it’s wholesome.

Uses a “Mastery” system that calls [[Warframe]] to mind, of all things. Perhaps it’s just the overlap in name, but the through line is the fact that advancing in any category grants an overall power level increase. In Farm RPG, the power increase comes through the availability of Perk Points. These points can be spent to increase the efficiency of lots of activities across the game. What it amounts to is that no content is wasted, even if you’re only engaging in it to gain the overall mastery level or perk points. This is a compelling metaprogression advancement structure.

Began playing this game in maybe March. Yesterday (in October) I had one of the moments where I go from “boy sure am enjoying this game” to “I’ve seen everything I need to see in this game and am no longer playing it effective immediately.” It’s odd because, as a general rule, I’ve interacted with the game multiple times of day most days a week. Many weeks it was every single day. I used the phrase “interacted with” instead of “played” because there’s actually not a lot of game here. The game is the grind. The game is the slow progression towards larger numbers by clicking options in a menu over and over. There aren’t even tradeoffs. I can’t think of a single time where I made an irreversible decision or chose one thing over another. There were places where I spent a resource on one thing instead of another, but never once did that lock out the alternate option, and never once did I spend a resource that I couldn’t get more of with time. There are also several systems in the game that are multiplayer equivalent of Veblen goods. Achievements desirable because of how few other players have them. In the page showing possible achievements that you can attain, they come with a list of how many players have unlocked that achievement .There was an appeal in getting achievements that 0.3% of the playerbase had unlocked. But like all multiplayer games, you’ll never be the person who’s at the top of the pile. At some point I joined the chat channel for the game. I only ever just lurked there and watched what others had to say. But many people were so clearly so far “ahead” of where I could ever get that it revealed my “achievements” for the shams they were. I didn’t play the game better than others. Indeed I’m not sure it’s possible to play the game better. You can just optimize better perhaps but there’s no expressiveness in play.

I believe that’s the core issue. There is utterly no expressiveness of gameplay. No talent trees to tweak your build with. No secrets you can uncover which no one else can. No novel solutions to a sandbox problem. Few if any games can offer truly unique experiences to each player, but certainly it’s got to be a requirement of a game that there is some player expression. (I don’t count the purely cosmetic expressions this game offers -- choosing what your mailbox or your player icon looks like.) Even a puzzle game has more expressiveness than this because there is decision making. The endpoint may be the same but there’s opportunity for failure. In FarmRPG there’s not even an opportunity for failure. There’s simply a conversion of time into resources which funnel into the same sinks for every player.

The most direct reason that I came to this existential point with the game was the release of a new skill called Mining. Mining joins the preceding five major skills in the game: Farming, Crafting, Exploring, Fishing, and Cooking. Those are all the right boxes to check in a game like this. Mining was long-awaited. The entire year I’d seen the promise of this new skill which would expand the game and offer a new and endless gameplay system. Leading up to, I saw people in chat who had access in Alpha remarking on how much fun everyone would have. I saw news postings over weeks teasing the release. I saw a marketing drive promising that if you ponied up real money for Beta access, you’d get mining early.

It released and I was thrilled! I dove right in. And it… fits exactly right with everything else in the game. Like, they pitched straight down the middle. Mechanically it’s the game [[Battleship]] with no opponent. No cost for failure. No entry fee except for easily-available resources, and no reward other than more resources that funnel right back into more mining, each level with diminishing returns. It’s not that it disappointed me. It’s that they hit exactly the experience that matches everything else in the game. And it made me step back and think “what are we doing here?”

Acknowledging the execution of the skill: it offers an addictive loop striking a perfect balance between engagement and mindless grind. It eventually reduces to an algorithm, and so honors a mindless approach, but it also is tuned so that you’ll progress most quickly if you execute the algorithm correctly. This is the right balance for the game. In a game that is the grind, you don’t want a brain-burning activity. You want something people can pull up on their phone with 30 seconds to kill and then give them a couple of numbers that go up with just enough friction that they are tricked into thinking they accomplished something. You feel good when your algorithm pays off, but the randomness also means you have something to blame when the algorithm didn’t result in success. The logarithmic approach of expanding the playing field at powers of 10 is also a nice approach. Much like the Mastery system elsewhere in the game. Again, they absolutely nailed the design of the skill to fit the rest of the game. And that’s the problem. I suddenly realized that the game isn’t actually fun.

I cannot overstate how obnoxious the writing and the characters are. The entity describing quests is some sort of fourth-wall breaking narrator with no actual identity. Nearly every “Help Request” ends with something almost exactly like “Will you bring \[person’s name\] the supplies they need?” Quests are structurally nonsensical as well. Someone will be preparing for some kind of voyage and for no clear reason they’ll expect you to bring 6,000 ears of corn, 500 pieces of copper wire, 2,000 cabbages, 500 ladders, 6,000 peppers, 4,000 lanterns, and a wax candle. There’s no sense of scale or logic that you can grapple onto. Want to craft a potato battery? That’ll be steel wire, a transistor, and eight potatoes. One of the most upsetting moments about this was when I read some updates notes describing how the development team was “really excited about the new questline.” I was genuinely stunned that someone was putting enough effort into the writing to be enthusiastic. As a result I started paying closer attention. And boy am I sorry that I did. There’s a dramatic mismatch between the self-serious approach of the writers and the quality of the output.

I generally make a point of being kind in my criticism, especially of small teams. But this is an area where I feel that my time and attention were disrespected.

Ultimately, when I deleted the game today, I felt relief. The phrase “millstone around my neck” came to mind. If I pull my phone out of my pocket next, I’ll return to something like [[Shattered Pixel Dungeon]], or [[Hoplite]], or just web browsing, and my quality of life will improve as a result.