---
Name: Forza Motorsport
Entry Created: 2023-06-01
Genre:
  - Racing
tags:
  - game
---
Tried various camera viewpoints. For a long time I played from the true driver’s-eye view, inside the car, seeing the steering wheel. I eventually gave up because it made the game less enjoyable. Great loss of situational awareness of the track, which removed the ability to play at a level I believe the game was intended. For a skilled driver, I believe the sport likely hinges on the way you approach turns in the track and the behavior of other cars on the road. In a real car you could turn your head slightly left and right, and you would likely have a more natural memory of the track upon which you are racing as a matter of practice. Playing from the driver’s eye view limits you and although it is very immersive visually, you are probably losing the more significant experience and strategy of the actual racing. I think this phenomenon occurs in other games, but I’m put most in mind of Klei’s [[Mark of the Ninja]]. Specifically, when you are throwing kunai in mid-air, time slows and allows you to precisely pick your targets. The game abstracts the twitch reflexes and maps them onto game and controller conventions. So your mind focuses on the intent you are trying to accomplish, not the actual physical execution the player is really doing, which (without a timestop) would be moving a thumbstick and pressing buttons in precise and rapid motions. Honestly this isn’t dissimilar from the way an RPG character levels up. The stat of “Evasion” or maybe the skill point of “Knowledge: Local” goes up, because your character is good at this thing that the player doesn’t need to actually be good at in order to have the intended experience of the game.

Level of graphical fidelity is incredible. It still looks like a video game, not photorealistic, but it seems like an artistic choice if anything. The cars are too shiny, too beautiful. Viewing them in the showroom floor looks better than reality. Not quite stylized, but pristine to the point of fantasy.

Clear emphasis on simulation is what kept drawing me back to improve my skills. More than once I set down the controller and thought “I’m just not good at racing games” because I don’t understand the physics at play. The physics are simulated more accurately than a tutorial can explain, but that also led to a gap between the true tutorial (“press RB to change camera angles, and don’t forget to accelerate out of turns”) and the time where I reached anything approaching competence with the game. What it took to really start building competence was turning off some of the driving assists, and playing enough to start developing a feel for racing. Don’t focus on the racing line, look ahead to the track and start to judge when you should brake. If you keep hearing the tires squeal, it means they are losing some grip on the road, so braking and turning will be less effective. Wow I was able to brake and turn much harder into that sharp corner than others -- why? Oh, because it’s uphill so my tires are pressing harder into the road and gripping more. There is a tremendous amount of car customization and detail modeled in what different parts and tuning options will do to the characteristics of your car. I didn’t actually engage with much of that, I just used the auto-upgrade feature. But the important part is what it signals about the fastidiousness of the underlying physics simulation. A gear-head might actually make some of these tweaks because they know what effect they’ll have on the car, and then get the payoff because the car and physics are modeled accurately enough for that tuning to pay off.