---
Name: Gato Roboto
Entry Created: 2024-06-01
Genre:
  - Action
tags:
  - game
---
Clean, simple, but rich action exploration game that draws very clear inspiration from [[Metroid series]]. The ability for your cat to exit the suit adds depth to the way the map is designed. It also facilitates a few other vehicle types, like an immobile cannon, and a submersible. The two primary weapons are a pea-shooter and a missile. The pea-shooter has infinite ammo and stuns enemies briefly, so it can be used to stunlock a vulnerable enemy. The missile is powerful and does not have ammo depletion, but it is limited by a cooldown meter, and it causes some significant knockback. Movement is very responsive although it carries quite a bit of inertia, enough to make some jumps difficult. A spin-jump that unlocks later serves as a double jump and gives more vertical motion, but early on, blast radius from missiles can be used to jump higher. There was at least one place in the game where I progressed far into a new area of the map using the missile-jump. Only later did I realize that section was certainly meant to be traversable on the main path, but only after acquiring the spin-jump. I am confident that this missile jump can be used to sequence-break for those so inclined.

This is another game that’s blessedly short. All killer and no filler. I completed my playthrough in about 2.5 hours, which I tracked via a playtime clock right in the main interface. That reminds me -- there is a very cute startup sequence when the cat jumps into the mech, where a few diagnostic lines and a callback to DOS-era computers flashes at the top of the screen while various meters appear. The fact that this is so short reminds of me games like [[Persona 5]], in that they are supremely confident in their style and thus don’t show a need to force the player to focus on the same neat visual trick over and over. Some of those visual tricks are indeed neat, but they lose their luster if they repeat often and disrupt gameplay.