---
Name: "Ghostwire: Tokyo"
Entry Created: 2023-06-01
Genre:
  - Action
  - RPG
tags:
  - game
---
Played about an hour via Game Pass. Was surprised when I saw the Bethesda logo onscreen as publisher, but helped set my expectations. That, along with the cinematic intro sequence of the lead character on a motorcycle racing to the hospital to see his dying sister. The vehicle and character animations were neither fluid not lifelike. A still screen shot probably would have looked nice, but in motion it didn’t convincingly come together. At the same time, there was a facility for changing camera angles, and although I don’t remember the music specifically, I remember the overall sound design being convincing. My takeaway was that the production value was short of triple-A and yet clearly crafted with skill and love, so I was in for something other than [[Call of Duty]]. There was little surprise then when I gained control of the character for the intro, and got magic powers shooting of my hands and a big RPG skill tree soon after.

The most impressive thing about the game did end up being the overall art direction. There is spectral or ghastly horror with the enemy designs and with the event scripting of the missions. For example, walking down the hall of an abandoned hospital when suddenly at the end of the hall you see a woman in a hospital gown who walks around the corner and into a conflagration, then the whole thing disappears. The other impressive element of art direction was the expressiveness of the character’s hands when performing actions. Charging a wind shot means your character will make four aggressive hand gestures in sequence before posing his hands in a design out in front with green wind particles sputtering around them. Compare to charging a blast in [[Metroid Prime]], where a ball of light grows around Samus’s blaster and the arm cannon vents open up a bit. Previous to this, I would have said Metroid Prime was one of the strong games in immersing the player via visible reactions of the player’s body, but it’s far behind Ghostwire: Tokyo. Another example is when you “pull the core” from an enemy’s body, in which you strike out at a brightly-lit bauble revealed gradually out of their chest by blowing bits apart from them via repeated magic strikes. When you trigger a core removal, Akito will lash the core with spectral threads, wrap the cords in a taut pattern between several fingers, then pull. This is a very unusual way of presenting something that could otherwise have been mundane.

Ultimately I am unlikely to continue with the game. Even though a big skill tree and stealth takedowns are normally catnip to me, a few things put me off. I don’t generally love horror games, and there is a recurring type of stealth takedown when you see the slenderman-style business person bent back to have his sewn-up eye sockets stare into you. I don’t want to see that sort of thing hundreds of times over the next dozen hours. I also don’t want to have yet another game where I spend my time crouching around waiting for stealth kills, especially if there is no movement gimmick to liven things up. From a read of a review online after playing, it doesn’t appear that there will be a movement gimmick that will come into play for moment-to-moment combat or traversal.