---
Name: "Golden Sun: The Lost Age"
Entry Created: 2026-01-01
Genre:
  - JRPG
tags:
  - game
---
After reading the conclusion of [[Golden Sun]]’s story, I jumped into The Lost Age to at least get through the prologue. I remember from childhood the shock of beginning TLA as the “bad guy” party. A memorable inversion even all these years later. The story’s setup as a duology is uncommon -- Golden Sun ends on a cliffhanger with absolutely no attempt to wrap up the plot. And TLA begins where GS split off a few characters. They are clearly two pieces of the same whole.

After playing through the prologue and finding out that my new party starts at the same power level as the first, I also searched whether or not there are mechanical differences between GS and TLA. There aren’t. As a result, knowing that I had milked the gameplay I wanted out of GS, I decided not to complete TLA. I did read a story summary. The story does wrap up nicely but at the end of the day it’s a straightforward fantasy save-the-world. Although I like those in general, the characters and dialogue are not compelling enough now as an adult that I would see it through another potentially 30 hour game. The most magical moment had already passed: the flip to the other party to begin the second half of the duology.

In reading up on the second, I did see how many classes I had missed by either not having enough djinni or perhaps failing to experiment enough with them. I had reduced the class system in my mind to fairly linear progressions based on which single-element djinni were equipped per character. There’s more to it than that. I don’t know how dramatically it would have changed things since the classes were still often similar. There didn’t seem to be much variation in combat approach that hinged on classes. Elemental Psynergy differed but the ones I saw were all versions of spells with single-target starter versions, three-target improved versions, and three- or five-target ultimate versions. Some spice thrown in there with other single moves per classes but little systemic differentiation. This is the one place where the opaqueness of the stats/classes (perhaps caused by the GBA’s limited screen size) was truly a sour note. I’d have appreciated more insight into the relative power changes and specialities depending on class selection.

This duology overall stands the test of time. It’s designed with high usability. The art is stylized and so does not look terribly dated. The environmental puzzle solving is a rare approach and is notable in that it ties combat moves into exploration moves, which is always appealing to me. The battle system is straightforward but effective. And the djinni/class system is unique. Although it’s not as deep as I thought it might be, it’s still an unusual approach that sets the game apart. The process of releasing djinni powers, summoning elementals, and then resetting djinni is still a satisfying loop that I returned to over and over throughout my playtime. It works because it gives an alternate method of accessing special moves without consuming PP. During character building it also grants some flexibility to map enough djinni types that provide the desired class while still supplementing class abilities with djinni that have useful abilities while not changing the class in an undesired way. For example, I can map two earth djinni to Mia because I want her to be that Acolyte class (or whatever) but still give her that one water djinni that grants the AoE heal spell. I haven’t seen a similar system replicated and it’s worth re-interpretation.