---
Name: "Legend of Zelda: Echoes of Wisdom"
Entry Created: 2024-06-01
Genre:
  - Adventure
tags:
  - game
---
Refreshing and free-form in its approach to puzzles. You get a bunch of tools and pull them out of your toolbox as you see fit. Even now I have a score or more of echos to choose from. I have some favorites that I lean on often but also run into a few puzzles that make me dig a little deeper into that toolbox. It’s an effective tool for pacing the experience. The inclusion of a resource-limited swordfighter mode gives you the occasional safety valve to take combat into your own hands. This helps from feeling totally passive in combat. So far each boss battle has effectively required sword fighter mode and I’m a little more neutral on that. I generally prefer bosses that are final exams for the way you’ve been playing the rest of the game. These are a little more orthogonal to the primary experience of each dungeon.

The classic Zelda dungeon format is lock-and-key. You work your way through the first half of a dungeon seeing that you lack something. You receive an item halfway through the dungeon that recontextualizes what’s come before. You then go back through and use that key to unlock everything and move forward. The best Zelda items also have many uses outside of their home dungeon. This approach still holds up but with new Echoes as the keys. It feels less on-the-nose while still fitting perfectly into classic dungeon design. The only thing that’s missing is the middle loop of returning to places in the dungeon with your new tools. Generally the dungeons here have been a directed graph that always pushes forward. There may be places where you can go in multiple directions and choose one to tackle first, but generally you’ll have the key by the time you encounter the lock. This is slightly less powerful than, say, [[Ocarina of Time]] or [[Link to the Past]] dungeons.

I ran into a character leading up to the penultimate dungeon that sent me into a screeching halt on the game. A gentle giant, fluffy-yeti-thing that spoke of himself in the third person. I had just returned to the game after a month or two away and was having trouble digging in again. Having just completed a dungeon that contained a couple of arbitrary puzzle solutions, and in which I started to see the essential push to sameness in Echo use, I was not riding high in the game. Then this dumb thing started standing between me and progress. His childlike design coupled with the toy-like visual style of the game took away my last wisps of goodwill. Uninstalled at 85% complete.