---
Name: "Pocket Card Jockey: Ride On!"
Entry Created: 2024-06-01
Genre:
tags:
  - game
---
Playing this very shortly after the release of and several hours of playtime with the excellent Poker roguelike [[Belatro]], my response is perhaps more muted than if I’d come across this game a week earlier, or a year earlier. It’s cute and odd, but I think it’s going to fall into an uncanny valley for me. It’s closer to the rules of Solitaire than to poker, and there is something meaty on its bones in the way it presents the entire range of cards at once, allowing you to quickly form a strategy for creating a combo from them, while the time pressure forces you out of analysis paralysis. I think ultimately though the time pressure will be the reason I don’t sink my teeth into the game. It’s abstract enough that the time pressure is only going to end up making me fight the controls with gamepad input. And the theme of horse racing, while cutely and attractively presented, doesn’t interest me in the slightest.

I can absolutely see why this was a cult classic in the DS era, and the price is probably right for a remake at this fidelity, but it’s probably also past the point where it’s truly a special game.

A week or two later… I’ve returned to this game two or three times. There actually is skill here. My horse isn’t getting any better (or at least isn’t improving between horses, as I’ve just now unlocked horse breeding). Yet my results are improving, and I can reliably win all but G1-class races. I’ve gotten better at playing the solitaire portion of the game, but also at understanding the mechanics of the actual racing. I still am of two minds on whether the racing should have been tutorialized better. I’m not necessarily saying there should have been additional mandatory tutorial levels. But perhaps an interim step where there’s an in-game manual I can reference. Understanding explicitly what sets the horse’s pace was the most recent big hurdle I overcame. On the other hand, that processes of slow discovery gave the game more longevity than I was expecting.

Now the issues with this port are really starting to grate on me. There’s no way to pause during a race. The text still references “tapping the phone” in places. And there are some things that maybe aren’t related to the port but rather should have been fixed in the remake itself. For instance, you must wait for the shopkeeper to finish two unskippable and un-speed-up-able lines of dialogue completely before taking each next action in the shop. At first it was annoying because the UI would register my action but nothing would happen, so I thought it was a problem with the port. Now I realize that it’s just a strange oversight, not a bug. The loading screen is similar. The UI thread slows down while loading between races. You can tap a button to pause the loading screen on the tip. But occasionally the button text won’t update even though the loading screen has paused (technically, you are the one who hit the pause button). But it took a while for me to pull those two issues apart.