---
Name: Remnant 2
Entry Created: 2023-06-01
Genre:
  - Action
  - RPG
tags:
  - game
---
Played perhaps half an hour on Game Pass. Polished presentation. Unsettling and unusual enemy designs that are compelling, and competent third-person combat. The tutorial leans heavily into characters that I did not become interested in. My stopping point was after finishing the highly-linear, scripted tutorial area. I didn’t want to wander around and talk to characters I didn’t care to get to know, and I also was rewarded with one “trait point” for leveling up after the tutorial. I went into the menu to spend it. I saw lots of inventory slots for looter-shooter gear (already have one of those in my life), and then paged over to the skill tree page. For my trait point, I could select things like “+3 Health” (out of 100), or a 2% improvement to skill cooldown. So underwhelming as to be meaningless. Those are bonuses on the level of [[Diablo 3]] Paragon point bonuses, which come at level cap after you’ve spent 60 levels unlocking a significant new toy almost every level, especially at the beginning of the game. Each of those trees also max out at ten points invested on a linear scale, so I’ll end with 30% more health or 20% reduction in cooldown time after presumably many hours of play and only investing down a single upgrade path. Either of those ten-point capped values would be better served as a single, significant perk choice.

I think of the difference in [[Destiny]] and [[Warframe]]. Remnant studied at the school of Destiny. The design supports a little bending at the edges, and the game is built around a single mostly-static position of carefully crafted strength. The player choices are very nearly just flavor. Warframe on the other hand throws out a bunch of tools with the expectation that things will break, and the design instead is just built to allow breakage without collapsing the game. I’ve heard this difference in the [[Guilty Gear]] series of games and their character design, as compared to e.g. a [[Street Fighter]]. Guilty Gear characters have wildly different capabilities and playstyles, to the point that they could come from entirely different genres of games, but they all share a few design “release valves” to allow such bonkers design differences, like each character having a limited-use guard break or similarly a limited-use ultra-guard.

It’s possible the game is just hiding its best for a bit later, but since I already have Warframe as a looter-shooter, and since I am pretty down on grungy violent worlds right now, centered around characters that aren’t compelling, I decided not to dive in. Here’s another example of how Game Pass may be hurting me, however -- had I paid a full premium price for the game, I don’t think I’d have left disappointed so quickly. I’d have given it several more hours. Time enough for a more compelling big hook to appear, or for enough additional little Velcro hooks to get me attached.