---
Name: Romance of the Three Kingdoms 8 Remake
Entry Created: 2025-01-01
Genre:
  - Strategy
tags:
  - game
---
One of my vague concepts for a game many years ago was a space game where you were a “hero” and most other galactic denizens were just people. You’d be the one turning the tide of battles and fueling the big events. The galaxy would live around you but it would be your deeds that really shaped it. There’d be other “hero” type characters who could become your rivals. And the galaxy would be modeled from the empire level down to the individual traders. You could be any role and as your responsibilities increased the game would shift along with it to reflect what you’d focus on.

RotTK is a wonderful implementation of that vague idea that I never even started on. I’ve played as both a Ruler and a Common Officer now and they are very different experiences within the same framework. The game succeeds in telling a story at both levels. As the Ruler I saw my decisions shaping the map and how my wins and losses made a regional difference. As the Common Officer I’ve focused on making my Ruler happy, forming relationships, and leveling up so that I’ll be ready when battle comes.

There is a strong role-playing aspect to the game, as in playing a role. Many story events can be triggered based on conditions and I’m having fun seeing the events. There’s also a bit of my imagination filling in the gaps. Many ambient/random events recur but I look at them differently depending on which Officer they occur with. I’m enjoying the role playing more as a Common Officer than as a Ruler. It makes less sense for the Ruler to personally go and break up a fight in the market.

The scale of the game is incredible. China might as well be a world map in any other game. It’s a little more abstract than something like [[Unicorn Overlord]]. UO had a scale that was impressive and yet still intimate because of how events happened directly on the map. RotTK uses provinces and then zooms right down to battlefields. Towns are abstract menu screens but little details make them feel more real. When you move your cursor to each option, the associated area of town lights up. And on the streets you can see people moving, birds flying. There are tactical battles on a hex grid. Each unit is supposedly 10k or so troops and the leaders of each unit can grant their troops a Tactic like setting a hex aflame or attacking three hexes at once. And then the scale goes down to giving a gift to a certain officer or caring how much trust you have built. Each individual officer has a couple of dozen skills with multiple ranks plus potentially a trait as well as five stats. It’s astonishing that the scale goes from top to bottom so well where I care about an individual officer’s Leadership rating as well as the number of troops in a province.

The trick is in how strongly the Officers influence the rest of the systems. Officers define battle tactics, success of strategic actions, power of armies, effectiveness of town actions. Each Officer has a ridiculous level of influence on the game and so you care about them at every zoom level. It seems to work thematically too. I’ve often heard about the Three Kingdoms period and how it chronicles decades of war in China yet is a character-based work. Honestly, wouldn’t that describe any high fantasy novel? Does it not describe The Lord of the Rings?

In once instance I had worked for in-game years to stage a knockout blow on a neighboring province. It had been taken from me years early and went back and forth with impotent punches. I marched my superior force with the excitement of crushing my rival. A few turns into the battle my leader, the captain of my strongest army and the linchpin of my force, was challenged to a duel. I lost! And my entire, most powerful unit was wiped out. The tide turned immediately and I was driven back to my capital to nurse grievous wounds that affected the next six months of even my town actions. What a swing and an emotional blow. I went back and forth for a couple of (real-life) days on whether I wanted to turn that “Duel” feature off since it had ruined my offensive. But I’ve settled on, no, this is part of the game. How much more dramatic was that experience? How much sweeter will the final victory be if I can ever take back that province?

I’ve heard about this series for many years. Perhaps as far back as the Super Nintendo if I’m remembering correctly. (From a glance at Wikipedia, looks like it goes back to the NES.) It is broadly similar to the [[Crusader Kings]] series in the way that it’s played on a strategic world map yet hinges on things like court intrigue. If this was the first to do this concept, then that’s remarkable. And the above anecdote illustrates what I’ve always heard from experienced players of CK and other grand strategy Paradox games -- that you play not to win but to tell a story. Again, much like tabletop role playing.

Also: incredible that a full-on grand strategy game works so well on the Switch! It’s complex but the UI works and the performance is perfectly adequate.

This game is quite an achievement!

I’m playing this game at the same time that I’m reading the Aeneid. In both works there is the idea of what Logen Ninefingers in the First Law trilogy would have called “Named Men.” Nameless rabble fight and die merely to show scale. Only the Aeneas or the Turnus or the Achilles actually tilt the scales. In RotTK battles are waged by Officers. The “toops” are just numbers to, effectively, define how many officers you will bring into battle. You can’t have a battle without them but they also don’t really matter. Even in the First Law, the Named Men would at least interact with “troops”. Troops were a threat. The battle would shift around their pushes and pulls. No so in the Aeneid and not so in RotTK. Officers are a separate class of being. Even in [[The Aeneid]], a stray arrow might wound Aeneas, but it was Fate that drew the arrow and Virgil acknowledges that it doesn’t even matter where the arrow came from -- nameless rabble or Named Man.

Played through a Lu Bu ending. Started as a Common Officer, moved up through the ranks to Governor. As a governor I engaged in an ill-considered advance on my provincial neighbor. I was repelled and developed an Antagonistic relationship with the Ruler of the associated Force. Triggered a Historical Event that resulted in me betraying my ruler (Lu Bu is not a light-side character) and then taking his place as Ruler of a smaller region. Retook the rest of the land the combined Force held previously. Then returned to my own personal war against the Force that I’d lost to earlier. I triggered an Ending condition by completely destroying that Force and taking the associated Provinces.

Very little actual gameplay in the above description. Yet in my mind that was the story of my game. From a strategic perspective I was occupied with true strategic concerns. I captured and turned certain provinces into engines for Gold, Troops, and Supplies. I used strategic alliances to cover my flanks and dissuade threats from invading me. In the tactical battles, I lost some battles with poor play (partially also due to bad RNG at critical points) but I learned from those losses. I then won some battles with better play. And there was a nice link between strategic choices and tactical. I found it most effective to destroy an enemy castle’s gates and make it easy to capture, but there was at least one battle where I was not able to and instead had a slugfest with the opposing army, something I was able to do only because I had prepared well strategically. I was confident enough in my play by the end that I was willing to delegate large battles without feeling like I was cheating. I’d probably make more use of that delegation in future plays if I ever do one.

The monthly role-playing did wear thin by the end. It fell in a sour spot where it was too specific to let me fully tell my own story but not tailored enough to feel like I was actually role-playing. I’d see the same tavern requests and was invited to hunt or to the bar dozens of times. It was also weird that, by the end, as a ruler of a Force spanning eight or ten provinces (probably the largest on the map at that time), I would be asked to find a missing merchant or kill a single bandit in the hills. A better approach might have been to swap the event palette based on your status as a Common Officer vs. Governor vs. Ruler, etc. Or, to remove most of the dedicated hand-written content and simply reduce it to numbers and pictures, letting me fill in the gaps to tell my own story. The approach taken by [[XCOM]]. And the idea of “closure” in McCloud’s [[Understanding Comics]].

I’m sitting here trying to decide whether to jump back in as a Common Officer or Warlord. But, I really don’t want to see all of those repeated events again. The pacing is probably a little off for focusing just on the strategic, too -- there’s just a few strategic actions and then a lot of pressing A and X to advance the same events over and over.

I did decide to go back and play a custom-created Common Officer. I chose a different start period and it provided a significantly different context. It was a few years after the conclusion of my Lu Bu game and it was neat to see the end of his story arc from outside. As my custom character, I was promoted to a Governor almost immediately. I decided to resign and switch to another Force shortly thereafter. It was cool to wander as a Free Officer for a little while. However, when I tried to rejoin a specific force, I was rebuffed time after time with no clear reason why. My mind filled in gaps that I simply wasn’t renowned enough. I spent a few in-game years (!) wandering and building more renown, but it never worked. There were no threats to my character during this period and nothing else to do but slowly and mindlessly click advance on basic requests to grind up more stats in the hope that it would break through. That’s where I decided to quit. Nonetheless, it was very cool to zoom in to such an intimate level inside of this grand game.

Your character actually has very little ability to roleplay as I’ve thought about it more. Your options are basically do accept or deny a few basic generated decision points. The result of all of them is basically just a stat increase of some kind. The upward progress is very slow. Any given in-game year might result in you making a couple of new friends, a couple of stat points, and maybe a new skill. That’s of course ignoring the strategic level which I could have participated in again.

I was listening to a podcast about Crusader Kings around the time I was playing that last Common/Free Officer game and I did hear a couple of differences that seem significant. First, other officers in your list of close relations are quite static. To use a specific counterexample given from Crusader Kings, your spouse will never cheat on you, or your sworn brother will never betray you, unless you initiate an event that would have them do this. This game also has a more… well, romantic approach to things like betrayal and friendship. Characters don’t have shades of gray really. They wear their motivations on their sleeves. When they collide with one another it feels telegraphed and unavoidable (in a good way) instead of shocking. Characters are not complex. Of all things, the art style may have something to do with this. It’s closer to a comic book than an episode of Game of Thrones. And, in the authored historical events, the drama is centered on characters who embody honor, or evil, or strategy. It feels grand in the literary sense instead of petty.

Also references [[The Blade Itself]] as a stand-in for the First Law series.