---
Name: Spiritfarer
Entry Created: 2025-01-01
Genre:
  - Slow-life
tags:
  - game
---
Beautiful artistically. Looks like a high quality animated movie. Both in still shots and in the expressive animations and characterizations of characters. 

The beauty belies a game that requires an existing lexicon of game mechanics. Where [[Animal Crossing - New Horizons|Animal Crossing]] has an anemic sprint button, Spiritfarer has a double jump. Basic gameplay requires manipulation of a world map, a planning grid for buildings, and 2D platformer movement with time critical sequences. This wouldn't be a gateway game. It was bold to make a game like this which looks inviting but is mechanically robust. 

2D platformer movement is a very different feel from Animal Crossing’s 2D plane movement. Platformer style has gravity which means your character will move without your input. Part of gameplay is fighting the physics. In Animal Crossing your character will not move without you. If you release the stick you stop moving. That makes the control scheme more inviting to a player without a practiced sense for 2D platformer physics. Platformer movement also requires simultaneous use of both hands. Button to hump while also left stick to move. AC only requires one input at a time.

I’m now up to 10 or 15 hours in the game. For the last several hours I’ve thought “I’m pretty much done with this game.” I haven’t had any sense of distaste. Simply reaching the point I always reach with a game where I’ve gotten everything I’ll get from it. (An aside: This might be rooted in Raph Koster’s idea that this happens when a game has nothing left to teach me. It might be better framed as “I have nothing left to learn” from a game. In a game like this I’ve still wanted to “learn” the next character, the next bit of story, the next animation, the next dialogue. I still do to some degree.) Despite being on the edge of quitting for several hours, I kept coming back to the game over and over in a mildly compulsive loop. I’d turn the Switch on, harvest and replant, set the next destination, then stop again. That power of overlapping progression loops.

The reason I’m finally stopping is that the mechanical elements of the game have failed me. I knew it was over for me when I harvested some corn and couldn’t bring myself to go through the steps of replanting anything. Each animation is beautiful and delightful but also sedate. The game ensures that you see the delight of every frame in every animation as many times as it plays. Over hours that’s become burdensome. The contrast that comes to mind is [[Persona 5]]. Every single still frame of Persona 5 is equally gorgeous and compelling but the game doesn’t slow down for you to enjoy the view. The effect of this is that you’re still soaking in the animations dozens of hours into the game. Furthermore, it means that your gameplay is not being slowed down by having the re-watch animations. You play as fast as you want.

That isn’t the only mechanical thing that’s bothered me. There’s an increasingly heavy reliance on platforming skills. The game makes a good effort but is definitively not a platformer. Double jumps are inconsistent near walls or when chained with other maneuvers. Any move that requires holding down on the stick is essentially unusable unless you switch to the D-pad. The game appears to only register down on the stick when you have it positioned within a very small angle of perfectly down. Anything else and it will read the input as left or right. Very often this means that the intent is to drop through a platform but the effect is to jump up. Another burden is that edges are visually soft making it hard to tell where the physics body is located. This means that trying to jump off the very edge will often result in barely walking off the edge then doing a double jump. It also means that mantling up onto a higher platform will inexplicably fail.

Finally, there is a lot of traipsing across the map and waiting to arrive at the next destination. In theory this should work since there’s plenty to do on the ship. You ought to be spending that time gardening, forging, sawing, weaving, cooking, chatting, or re-architecting. The problem is that the game is too generous with success in those tasks. I had built up an inexhaustible stockpile of inventory items, and had pegged the happiness bars for my guests, way before I had completed all of the back-and-forth tasks across the world map. The balance between those things does not survive past the first hours. That would be a very difficult thing to get perfect. I’m not even sure it’s perfectible. An excellent attempt but unsuccessful for whatever my playstyle has been in this game.

The progression in the game has been a little uneven and I’ve loved that. It’s actually a contrast to [[Doom - The Dark Ages|Doom: The Dark Ages]] in that way. The curve of Doom progression is perfectly shaped and consistent. Enter a new stage, get a new weapon, pick up currency, upgrade an old weapon. Enter the next stage, get the next new weapon… Progression in Spiritfarer happens in fits and starts. A long and uncertain time passes between one traversal ability and the next. With each new ability comes new opportunities across the map but not all of them are equally lucrative. Sometimes a new resource is gated behind bringing a new spirit onboard. Upgrades at the shipyard are all good but certainly not created equal. My ship was too small and required careful placement optimization until the moment it wasn’t and I could throw things wherever I wanted. This spiky progression graph kept things interesting.

Actually, there’s one more way the progression failed me. I never got better at any task. Neither me as a player nor my avatar. As a player, all minigames were simple with no skill ceiling. Easy to learn and easy to master. As an avatar, there was no idea of leveling-up or becoming more proficient at tasks. I have a tiny bit of cynicism towards leveling up mechanics. I deeply love them but they can also veil a weak game with the cheap pleasure of numbers going up. Thus it’s with some surprise that I say a leveling system would have made this game better. It could have made otherwise-inconsequential activities tie into something larger and would have made me more forgiving of activities that felt grindy for no benefit.

Defies convention by using the Y button as the back button. Frustrating.