---
Name: "Star Ocean: The Second Story R"
Entry Created: 2024-06-01
Genre:
  - JRPG
tags:
  - game
aliases:
  - "Star Ocean: The Second Story R"
---
Fairly trim runtime for a world-spanning classic JRPG. I rolled the credits at around 27 hours, having a completed a fair amount of optional material along the way.

The single biggest thing holding the game back from being a potential classic is the weakness of the characters, a direct result of the disjointed writing. Not a translation issue -- the writing. Events that should be significant in the plot fly by with inappropriately-little response from the characters. Off the top of my head, the worst offender is when Claude watches the cabal of villains kill his father. In the hour leading up to this story beat, Claude sees various flashbacks of growing up the son of a celebrated military hero, and the complexity and difficulty that might cause. In hours before then we occasionally see from the father’s viewpoint the sacrifices he’s made for his son against his duty as an officer. The stage is set. The villains murder his father before Claude’s eyes. Then literally the next day, when asked about it by another character, says something like “it’s OK, I don’t think he’d want me to be sad.”

In the final moments of the game, a mayor in an endgame city decides to doom his entire planet, and “billions of people”, because in his mind, their time is through. There is mention of possible spacetime paradoxes when a planet is brought back from destruction, but nothing comes of it. One of the dual protagonists learns she is from 700 million years in the past, has a quiet moment to think about it, screen fades out then in, then she gets up and is ready to move on. One of the characters in my four-person main fighting party is a woman who carries around a giant athletic spirit finger as her weapon who literally drops out of the sky on top of the main character, lovably-creepily in that JRPG way claims ownership over his romantic interest, then never speaks again in a main story cutscene the rest of the game. Another main character (who was displaced by spirit finger girl for stat reasons) is met at random in a cave fighting a monster, then twenty in-universe minutes later damns himself to a life with snakes wrapped around his neck because he was worried if he didn’t the party which he wanted to spend his life with would disown him. Even as I’m typing this, and reading how nonsensical it is, I’m trying to cut it some slack, but I’m not doing justice how nonsensical it is. Not “over the top” like [[Xenoblade 2]]. Actually nonsensical.

If you read a summary of all the major plot points, you’d think “hey, we have something here, folks.” It’s in the moment-to-moment writing that the game fails so hard.

The skill system is unique as far as I know, and very interesting. Characters can freely level up skills, and skills each generally give a combat bonus. When multiple skills reach a certain level, they feed some sensible “Item Creation” or “Specialty” which allows the character to take an action out of combat. For example, increasing “Knife” skill gives ATK bonus, and if you also put points into the “Recipe Knowledge” (?) skill alongside “Knife”, you will unlock a “Cooking” IC ability. Layered on top of that are party-wide “Super Specialities”, where multiple party members can do yet another action with a power determined by the sum of their relevant skills. So a character with high Smithing skill can hit things better in combat, perform more potent Customization of his gear, and contribute to the party’s overall Blacksmithing skill. Very neat.

Missed opportunity in that IC skills are completely separate from Battle skills. Having to navigate choices from a single list of skills and a single source of points might have been neat. There’s also a talent system where characters have hidden talents that made them better at certain things. In theory this might help you shape your party as one character will be naturally better at certain IC specialities, and it did work, but I don’t know that it’s a better approach. I might have preferred just making characters into a party specialist based on my characterization of them instead of their randomly-rolled talents.

I still am not sure where I land on the realtime combat system. It has a button to execute a regular attack combo, a button to dodge enemy attacks, and two buttons that accept the assignment of a skill. Characters are broken up into skill users and magic users. If you are a magic user, you can map a spell to each of the two buttons, and anything else must be cast via spell menu which pauses the combat. If you are a skill user, you can only activate skills via one of the two buttons you assigned outside of combat. There is no way to activate a skill other than the two you assigned to a button. Meaning, within a combat, those skills effectively do not exist if you are controlling the character. Any character you aren’t actively controlling can access their full set of skills and spells. Later on, you do unlock the ability add one more skill as a linked skill for each button, which basically just means you can trigger the second skill right after the first one fully completes. It’s a baffling system.

There is a break system, but it’s undercooked. If you do enough break damage to an enemy, they become temporarily stunned. In general, skills either focus on break damage or HP damage. Also, enemies can break you, but only if you attempt a dodge and don’t time it perfectly. The cost of getting broken is not just a daze period -- it’s that you completely lose a party momentum gauge that carries important (effectively baseline) bonuses and which takes multiple battles to fill. The only significant benefit to timing a perfect dodge correctly is that you regain some MP. The other bonuses are basically in the noise of the combat system (you avoid damage from the attack, and you visibly dodge, which removes control for about the same amount of time as it would have taken to just soak the hit and endure a brief stun).

Ultimately, the combat system was the worst of both worlds. The “realtime” aspect just means button mashing, and the “turn-based” aspect where you can pause only effectively applies to your spell users. Late in the game you also spend much of your time as a melee character stunlocked out of your regular attacks.

All that said… because the runtime was less than 30 hours (instead of a generic 80 hour JRPG epic), ultimately it was worth seeing the game through to the end. It’s a unique approach that’s nothing like your [[Final Fantasies|Final Fantasy]] or your [[Dragon Warrior]]s, and even though there’s a reason that this game didn’t become one of the gold standards, it’s a neat exploration of what might have been.