---
Name: SteamWorld Build
Entry Created: 2023-06-01
Genre:
  - Strategy
tags:
  - game
---
Really appreciate the vibrant colors, and the fact that it’s a city-builder. The transition between game layers in realtime is a neat magic trick. Surprising that it plays so well as a handheld Switch game.

After completing my first rocket launch, at which point I could have called the game “complete”, I actually have gone back and completed two more launches on different maps. There is something that ends up being relaxing about the game loop. There is no real chance of failure, just lost time, and the game systems are always leaning forward. I started to improve as a player as well, by paying closer and closer attention to my production versus consumption of various resources. By my third playthrough I had actually become so proficient at manipulating the economic system that I was able to begin fueling the rocket without having built all of the required Scientist buildings -- and the game threw up an invisible wall and said “all Scientist needs must be met to create rocket fuel.” I have mixed feelings about this. I appreciate that the development team thought through this potential approach, and didn’t allow me to skip the final bit of gameplay. I was also mildly annoyed that all the work I’d done and understanding I’d built to break the game ended up being thwarted with no forewarning.

The biggest thing that separates this game from what I really think of as a city-builder is that the pathing barely matters. Roads must exist to tie together the various bits, and road upgrades do extend the reach of service buildings. But the only actual pathing that seems to matter is between warehouses and production buildings. For these, the optimal solution seems to always be just building more warehouse buildings close to production buildings. You end up with residential areas combining housing and service buildings, then you can pick an arbitrarily-distant plot and set up manufacturing areas. Because resources magically warp between warehouses, there’s no downside to this. Some alternate approaches to this are found in [[Against the Storm]] and in [[Cities: Skylines]]. In ATS, resources warp between warehouses, but warehouses require rare resources and there’s a real opportunity cost to building extra ones. On Prestige 1 difficulty, which is about my current skill level, I might build one or possible two extra warehouses after the starting one, but after that I either don’t have sufficient special resources or I need them elsewhere and can’t afford the opportunity costs. That makes the roads much more important because workers actually need to path between production buildings and warehouses for a significant distance at times. Same with hearths -- the people need their houses near hearths, and although they don’t actually path to their houses, they have to path to hearths on break. This keeps the road network critical and means building placement is important.The Cities: Skylines approach is that all resources warp instantly everywhere, but the people themselves have to path between their homes and their destinations (work, recreation, etc.). Traffic then becomes the factor, and managing traffic flow around the city becomes the driver for how the city is laid out. All that to say, the Steamworld: Build approach is far more forgiving, but also removes much of the strategy of actual city builders. It’s not a bad choice by any means, but it’s a very different approach and ends up resulting in a very different game if you go in expecting a traditional city builder.

Now that I think about it… that traditional city-building-thinking comes in play more in the mine than in the town. There, the location of various quarters does impact the travel time for units to their destination, and you may find yourself either building additional quarters in faraway locations to speed up transit time, or using one of your constrained resources (rubies, Vectron material) to build speed pads and teleporters which improve pathing speed.

The more I think about this game, the more impressed I am with the design. I’m glad I spent the time on it to start digesting some of the inner workings.