---
Name: Terraformers
Entry Created: 2023-06-01
Genre:
  - Strategy
tags:
  - game
---
Digital-board-game style game, but one that wouldn’t work as a physical board game. It’s single-player only, with the goal of terraforming Mars and building infrastructure so that humanity can settle there. Delightful theme and a game with a surprising level of polish. It’s been one of the strongest “one more turn” experiences I’ve had in a long time.

The reason it wouldn’t work as a true board game is the level of bookkeeping that would be required for the many resources in use. There are discrete game concepts like turns, a map with territories, cards, improvements, ongoing projects, etc. But turn over turn the game tracks an overall “support” metric (serving as the loss condition if it runs out, as well as the “hunger clock”) plus about seven or eight resources used for playing cards and building improvements. Any given resource doesn’t really get bigger than dozens stockpiled, but they all can have different income levels, and they are made further fiddly by the ability to manipulate them using as many as a dozen or more distinct trade routes which can swap one resource for another per turn. In every other respect this would probably fly as a medium- to heavy-weight tabletop game, but the size of the numbers as well as the bookkeeping ultimately require a digital implementation.

I’ve also enjoyed playing the game because of its benign and even hopeful theme of Mars exploration and settlement. There’s no war, and art style is clean and attractive, and though the characterization of some of its selectable leaders seems overtly progressive, it comes off more as a product of its time in 2023, rather than being preachy with a social message it wants to convey.

As a nice bonus, the Switch port is technically competent.

As an example of the careful design crafting this game has received, consider the starting resources when you choose the “Balanced” option upon starting a new game (versus “Expansive”, “Scientific”, etc.). You get two cards: a Farm and a Hab Unit. You get 50 power, which is a nice bank for flexible use until you get your own power engine running. You get 10 water, which is exactly enough to play your Farm on the first turn. And then you get 29 food, which is exactly one food short of playing your Hab on the first turn, since it costs 30 food. When I noticed this, it struck me as so odd that I had to pause and think about it. It’s too precise a number and the setup is too constrained for this to be accidental. And after I had thought about it for a moment, I became very impressed with what I believe the reason is.

Each turn you don’t add a new population to Mars, a reservoir of “Support” fills up each turn you don’t play a population card, and the reservoir rolls over and continues to fill turn by turn until it cashes out for you the next time you play a population card. Support is the game-end condition. The only way to lose the game is to run out of support. At the beginning of the game you start with 100 support, and nothing in the Support “reservoir” because it’s the first turn. If you play the Hab on the first turn, you gain no additional support (there’s nothing in the reservoir). If you wait to play the Hab until the second turn, you’ll get your first drop of Support in the reservoir, so you get 10 support for free by waiting till the second turn. And the pop comes with the ability to claim a piece of adjacent land -- on the second turn, you’ll have potentially two new spots to pick from instead of just one based on the way exploration works.

So, back to the start condition, on turn one, the only card you can play is your Farm. That farm will give you an income of +1 food. There’s no downside to playing it. And then the only other thing you can do on your turn is activate your leader power. So on turn one, you only have one possible actual decision to make: what leader power to play (and all of them help you, so you can’t pick the wrong one). But you now know also you have something to look forward to next turn. Now on turn two, with your new income of 1 food, you have 30 food and can play your hab. And then, through no decision of your own, you also get 10 Support from the reservoir that filled up last turn when you didn’t (couldn’t) gain a population. If you’d played your Hab on turn 1, you’d have gotten no Support from it. Also consider that you’ve now played two turns which are basically optimal, and yet you as the player actually played the cards and spent the resources, even though there was no other practical option you could have taken.

There are at least three reasons why this is brilliant. First, it silently tutorializes you about resource income, as well as the Support reservoir. You couldn’t help but see how you couldn’t play all your cards, you built a production building, and now because of your new income, you can play more cards, plus you get 10 support because you had to wait till the second turn to play your hab. Second, it prevents a new-player trap. If you started with 30 food on turn one, it would be the wrong move to play the Hab turn 1, because you’ve give up 10 support for no benefit (there’s no immediate-term benefit to ending turn 1 with an additional population). New players would play the card because they can, and give up Support which is most likely critical to them since it’s the game-ending resource and they’re learning the game. Experienced players will know not to play the Hab on turn 1 even though they can. So if you don’t prevent this bad decision, you are hurting new players but not impacting experienced players at all. A new-player trap. And then the third reason that this is a brilliant piece of design is that it makes turns 1 and 2 both productive, engaging, completely systemically driven, and yet basically play out the same every time. The real decision making mostly starts on turn 3, but you as the player can already see your budding Mars colony taking shape and you’ve felt success on turns 1 and 2. The psychological impact is that you take mental credit for progress and feel invested upfront. Credit to Geoff Englestein for this observation, but: this is the same psychology behind getting a loyalty punch card at the smoothie shop with the first two punches already filled in for you. For the company, giving a card with 8 slots and no punches is economically identical to giving a card with 10 slots and 2 punches pre-filled, but the psychological effect on the customer who receives one of those two is dramatically different.

Of course, mechanically, the game could start you on “turn 3” just as easily: both buildings already built, your starting resources reduced accordingly, and Support at 110 instead of 100. This is mechanically equivalent, and does eliminate what is ultimately busywork on turns 1 and 2 for the experienced player. But the tradeoff is that you lose all of the benefits described above.

In an interview with Soren Johnson, Jake Solomon recounted an anecdote from an experienced [[Magic: The Gathering]] player that Firaxis brought in to consult on an early version of [[Midnight Sons]]. The MTG player made the design observation that one of the reasons MTG is powerful is that there’s usually no wrong way to play turn 1. Your options are so limited that anything you can do is good. So there’s no analysis paralysis to start the game, and you begin turn 2 with psychological investment.

The game has an “Undo” button! Another great feature both for playability (in case you literally just press the wrong button) and for, and for experimentation. Have a new card and not quite sure what it does? Try it out. If it didn't work like you thought it did, undo. Makes me much more willing to experiment since I know I won’t torpedo a game by trying something new. A Soren Johnson thought there.

This is the most compelling “one more turn” game I’ve played in years. It drives the same level of engagement as the mainline [[Civilization series|Civ]] games. Successful games on higher difficulties can run on quite long (multiple hours) and have complex game states with many different cities plus modifiers accumulated over the course of completed leaders and projects. This does work against it being a “pick up and play” experience. I’ve found a couple of times where I set the game down and when picking it up the next day had to spend several minutes remembering what was going on. I’m not sure if there’s an easy fix for this though. The UI is very readable, and even without mouse/touch input, you can call up the helpful overview panel with a few extra button presses. Come to think of it, a dedicated button specifically to bring up that menu might be a big improvement. At least an option to present in the controller config menu.

In my longer games, I’ve also started to notice what a pretty game this turns out to be. The changes you make are reflected on the Martian surface, with lakes or ice sheets forming, plants and animals appearing on the 3D render, city lights around major population centers when the planet is rotated away from the sun, and even space projects appearing in orbit when zoomed out to max.

I do find the management of trade routes to be quite fiddly, especially with controller inputs (vs. mouse). Optimal play often requires multiple adjustments to trade routes every single turn, and with a controller this means: tap L, highlight the trade route section with the thumbstick, press A, move again to the arrow for import/export, press A however many number of times, move to the next trade route import/export button, press A a certain number of times, etc. I don’t think you can give up this level of fidelity without losing gameplay, but I’m not sure off the cuff what you’d do to fix it unless you were willing to completely overhaul the UI for consoles and controller inputs -- it’d be much more natural with a mouse. I do think of Soren Johnson’s quote that “players will optimize the fun out of a game”. His exact example was juggling partial production points in Civ 4, and this feels of a family with that phenomenon.

Jumped back into this game in mid-2024 because an expansion was released. The game is still relentlessly addictive, and the expansion is just that. It adds an additional layer of exploration and settlement to the game that feels fully integrated and yet still optional, like the oceanic exploration elements, or even the late-game prestige mechanics like animal life. The game is absolutely marvelous. I think again of how I bought this game on a whim while scrolling through the Nintendo eShop. I’ve certainly ended up with some stinkers using this method over the year, but when I find a game like this, I think it more than makes up for the misses.

Again returning to the game in late 2024 and it’s as compelling as ever. I came back this time not for its mechanical excellence -- although that’s still a factor -- but because of its optimistic view of the future of humanity and of space exploration.

City placement follows the “fixed city sites” model that I’ve re-encountered in the 4X space through [[Old World]]. In Old World, there are specific sites on which a city can be founded, and other tiles are simply ineligible. This is in most specific contrast to the Civilization model, in which cities can be freely founded on any empty tile (albeit with local restrictions like a certain distance from existing cities, and opposed by soft constraints like leaving enough tiles of space to fully utilize the production from potential city tiles). The most degenerate aspect of free city placement is when Civ becomes a game of “city checkerboard”. Cities are placed together in a repeating pattern as tightly as possible to optimize their usage. This is both visually a-thematic as well as mechanically banal. A middle approach is seen in games like Humankind, where the world is divided into regions, and each region can only hold one city, but within that system the city can be placed anywhere. Terraformers essentially follows the Old World model, where the possible placements for cities are limited and tightly controlled. The benefit to this is essentially that constraints breed creativity. When I find a site that I can found a new city, I jump into it immediately, and then my city planning becomes how to use the nearby locations. This also avoids analysis paralysis since I’ll really only have one or two possible city placement options at a time. There’s a decision point about when to found a city, and perhaps a choice between a couple of places, but the analysis is shifted to what to do with a city. It’s again like the psychological trick with loyalty punchcards.