---
Name: The Last Spell
Entry Created: 2025-06-01
Genre:
  - Tactics
tags:
  - game
---
I must have played this game before I started keeping the log of reflections. In that case, it’s been rattling around in my brain for years at this point before resurfacing now. At its core the game is an isometric turn-based tactics game. What makes it special is that it channels the “1 vs. 1000” feeling of musou games into the tun-based tactics genre. Another way of looking at it is as melding turn-based tactics with an action RPG -- each character levels up, chases gear, builds around stats and perk points, and takes on plenty of fodder enemies with a few elites thrown in. Hundreds of enemies will spawn over the course of several turns in the late combat phases. Even in the early few in-game days of each stage, when you start with only three hero characters, they’ll face dozens of enemies and mop the floor with them. It’s an incredible feeling to feel so overpowered after years of playing stingy turn-based tactics games like [[XCOM]] or [[Into the Breach]]. Both brilliant games for comparison. This one is just striving for something completely different. It succeeds because it allows the feeling of “running the table” in pool. Careful use of a character's turn means they can kill fifteen or twenty or more enemies each of the base enemy type. That’s less true if elites or unusual enemies are in the mix and those provide a texture to each turn. They’ll spawn in alongside the many fodder troops and change your approach to a situation.

There are heavy resource management elements of the game as well. These are themed as city-building, although it’s simply placing static buildings inside the city bounds. City resources include one to construct and upgrade buildings, one to construct and upgrade defenses, and one flexible “worker” resource to amp up the production or usage of a subset of buildings each day. The city is (or should be when you’re done) surrounded by walls, multiple kinds of traps, ballistae, catapults, watchtowers, warp points, and barricades. This provides a little mix of tower defense as well as puzzle placement since the city has limited space and you can block out your characters’ ability to move with careless placement of buildables. The tower defense pairs well with the character builds. I typically would stack many ballistae on two of the four sides of the city, and leave the defense of those walls to the turrets supplemented by a single character. I’d place two or more characters at the walls with fewer tower defenses. There are surely other approaches as well.

The game is stuffed to bursting with systems. A maximalist approach compared to the tight space of Into the Breach. Character stats include eight main attributes plus around fifteen secondary attributes. Each character also gets eight perk trees with six perks each. A max level character will have 11 perk points to allocate. Perks can be useful on their own or can synergize with certain attributes. Characters also have up to thirteen equipment slots. Equipment has both levels and rarities. A run can end with up to six characters in the party. There are two types of metaprogression systems, a system for configurable party-wide or city-wide perks, and the ability to shape the equipment pool which contains dozens of distinct equipment types which then get their randomized attributes layered on top.

All of this is delightful and bewildering and the game has lived on in my mind for so long at this point. I haven’t even begun to describe details on any system or the synergies between them.

There’s a “but” coming. Each stage is an hours-long affair. It’s closer to a full game a [[Civilization]] than to an XCOM stage. Each “night” will have somewhere between four and ten turns. In the last stage I played there are ten nights. So call it 60-80 turns of tactics gameplay in each stage with up to six characters to manage each turn. And then between combat phases there is a phase where careful planning and resource management is critical to keeping ahead of the power curve as the enemies scale. It’s tense and unforgiving as careless use of characters will see them killed in a single turn and walls broken down while enemies storm the city raising a panic level and resulting in fewer city resources the next phase. A vicious spiral where it takes more resources to rebuild but you gain less resources because you were less successful. The last stage I completed took me over four real-life days to complete. Obviously that’s calendar time, not the amount of time I had the Switch in my hands. But I didn’t feel I could leave and come back later because of the sheer amount of stats and abilities and context I needed to keep crammed in my head to manage the stage.

So, I deeply love that this game exists, but I don’t think I’ll be back. The difficulty will keep scaling which means lengthening. And the game is too tense to for me to be ratcheted up so high for so long. The cost of failure means hours and hours of time lost as the game thematically has a brutal failure state (you see your city destroyed and your mages killed while enemies swarm).

This leads me to one of the key things I want to reflect on with this game. If I love it so much, why don’t I want to keep playing? If I’ve apparently had this game in the back my my mind and loaded on my Switch for years, why am I now deleting it? XCOM has a very lengthy campaign which can also result in a failure spiral and invalidate many hours (at least from a perspective of diegetic success -- you still keep whatever fun you as a player had). I’ll spitball at six to eight hours for a completed stage. That would be a full-length standalone action game campaign all by itself.

Part of it is the number of characters to manage. It’s too many threads for too long. Six characters with thirteen pieces of gear each with eight main stats and fifteen secondary stats and 11 perks out of 48 is at least four characters too many for eight hours of game time where I may ultimately fail. That is the key takeaway. Give me one or two characters of that depth which I lovingly shepherd. I can handle losing. The consequence is one of the core draws of permadeath and of stage failure in games. XCOM similarly can have up to six characters. It limits characters by a clear class system. It has perks but fewer, and stats come, at least to the best of my recollection, primarily or only from gear in addition to those perks.

If there’s a law here: the complexity that a player can maintain in their head is inversely proportional to the amount of time they have to maintain that complexity.

The other stressor is the idea that a miss in my construction phase, the strategy layer, can cause a death spiral in the tactics layer. That’s also true of XCOM, and it’s also true that I didn’t really appreciate this potential death spiral in XCOM either.

The biggest bottom line: the game would be better if you chopped the number of nights per stage by two thirds, and tripled the amount of experience and resource gain to compensate. That alone would put things on the healthier end of that postulated law.

Gosh. It stresses me out just to see this game on the gone screen but it also grieved me to delete it. What a weird relationship with a game.