---
Name: "The Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom"
Entry Created: 2024-06-01
Genre:
  - Adventure
tags:
  - game
---
I returned to this game after completing the main story whenever I first played it. Everything that I’ve done this go-round would I supposed be considered “post game” content. Basically what that’s meant is I’ve wandered around the map messing around. The biggest thing I’ve done is spent more time in the Depths. Someone pointed out to me a while back that the shrines on the Surface are always located at the same place as Lightroots in the Depth. That presents a little guidance as well as often a set of puzzles to solve. You’ll know where a Lightroot is but can’t find the shrine. Not often is it vice-versa: although I spent my original time with the game essentially afraid of the Depths, now I find it a shortcut to locating Shrines. I noticed of my own observation that water features on the Surface are generally going to be impassible walls of stone from floor to ceiling in the Depths. That reduced some frustration about hitting those walls in the dark. I’ve also leaned more heavily on Zonai devices to move around.

One of the connections I’ve been thinking on is how so many elements of this game are the fullest evolution of ideas explored previously. In particular, I think now about how the Surface/Depths relationship began at least as far back as the Light/Dark worlds in [[Link to the Past]]. I have spent a lot of time with the original Legend of Zelda (#1). I have played enough in bits and pieces though to identify something in it that’s similar to TotK. In the original, the game dropped you onto a map, then stepped back. It encouraged, nay required you, to just go out and explore. TotK and [[BotW|The Legend of Zelda - Breath of the Wild]] are more heavily tutorialized and waypointed than the original, and yet still they preserve the idea that you have to traverse a surprising landscape that you haven’t explored yet. I can only assume that the Sky layer was also prefigured in Skyward Sword.

It’s been interesting to play this at the same time as Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity. They are of course very different experiences. AoC does equip you with versions of BotW’s rune (?) powers. That aids in memory and makes for a ready comparison with TotK’s powers. Stasis is a neat power and probably more useful in practice than Rewind, but I want Rewind to work so much that I think it ends up neutral. Magnesis is essentially obsoleted by the most basic functionality of Ultrahand. Cryonis and Remote Bomb are… fine? Not really on the same level as either of the other two from BotW, and certainly way behind Ascend, which continues to surprise me and promotes lateral thinking in a way similar to Portal (I mean… maybe you have to squint a bit.) Fuse is an odd duck. It’s absolutely critical to the experience of TotK. Your weapons are worthless without it. And there are neat tricks that come from fusing things to your shield. But I might not be clever enough to utilize it to its fullest potential.

I also recall how special the story path was in TotK. It was truly emotional. How incredibly powerful to hear those four notes of the classic treasure fanfare in full chorded glory for the only time in the game. And to see that iconic sword, dumb wing-things and all, rebuilt to so perfectly fit the TotK aesthetic. To know that its mottled lower section is left over from Ganondorf’s destruction, and that its upper light was forged in Zelda’s magic over thousands of years.

Clever detail: at the beginning of the game, Link’s body is polluted by Gloom. All of his power from BotW is lost. A classic sequel move. But as you find shrines and orbs of light, you offer them to the Goddess Statue and see the Gloom misting away from him. He is getting stronger because he's regaining his power. Satisfies the sequel reset in a way that is diegetically coherent.