---
Name: Urbek ity Builder
Entry Created: 2025-01-01
Genre:
  - Strategy
tags:
  - game
---
Snappy interface with plenty of shortcuts. Allows free camera control, both orthogonal and perspective cameras, and the ability to drop into first-person and walk through your city. It runs smoothly. Dropping buildings is instant. My previous city-builder on Switch was [[Cities: Skylines|Cities - Skylines]]. The difference in performance and quality-of life is astounding.

Two features stand out. First, the game hinges on a dozen or more different resources, all of which must be produced in your city to continue expanding. This is an abstract way of complicating city growth. Instead of running powerlines, just have enough power rate and stock. Simpler per resource, but because there are now so many resources, there’s still plenty to manage and scale up. Second, the whole game really hinges around building placement puzzles. Most buildings have extensive upgrade trees that require certain other buildings within a radius. Many of those support buildings can’t have other buildings inside their own radius. This is most similar to Islanders. In that game points are scored based on buildings being in the right placement. What’s so delightful is that this produces natural and unpredictable optimization problems that make perfect sense thematically. 

Dozens of hours in now and coming to the end of my time with the game. This is an impressive game -- mechanically, technically, aesthetically. (By the way, those may be the three key areas of game development.) I noticed several things that changed in the way I approached or appreciated the game.

- Cities can evolve, not just grow, over the course of a city. A key example is food generation. For much of the city’s lifetime, farms will need to grow and span perhaps a third or half of the total land space. At about 50k population, though (a mid-late-stage city), it becomes most effective to build an advanced city building which generates food. That building can only be built in an area where office complexes are built, which means a heavily urbanized area. At that point, the city zones become more effective than farming zones, so growth can now continue by converting previous farming zones into urban areas.
- Roads are trivial, and that significantly changes the game. They cost nothing to build and grant no benefit other than an easily-outbuilt concept of “connectivity”. There is no traffic congestion model. What this means is that the placement tension comes from building adjacency upgrades and making the best of limited space. This is opposed to Cities: Skylines where there is some tension in placement of city services like police, but mostly the tension is in continually adjusting roads and zones so that traffic can flow freely and citizens can get to their desired locations.
- The magic trick of changing perspective as desired never got old.
- My appreciation for the variation in city buildings grew. There aren’t oodles of variations on each building, but there are enough that, in concert with the texture-less voxels, the end result is a credible cartoon city.
- Many different buildings give “leisure” which is one of the local variables needed for building improvements. I like this approach since it allows thematic selection of placement at times. For example, both bars and libraries give leisure. When needing a leisure building near a school, I would put a library there instead of a bar.
- The placement puzzles continued to be important throughout my time with the game. I did internalize some useful “blueprints” for solving aspects of the puzzle. I came to rely heavily on city zones with a width of 6 and a length of perhaps 12 or 18, because it fit well with the adjacencies needed to grow into the most upgraded buildings. I also came to rely on predictable grids of farmlands where I could easily place farm sheds and food processing plants. The blueprints did work slightly at odds with the puzzle-like placement gameplay. Some terrain precludes certain types of buildings but this wasn’t enough to break me out of the blueprint mindset in most cases. I learned to sidestep this right upfront by just choosing large plots of land at the beginning of the game knowing that my farm zone would be here, my urban zone would be here, my industrial zone would be here.
- The game seems like it shouldn't work with how many resources there are. But almost all resources are still relevant into the late game. The other safety valve is that certain resources are gates or critical path for advancement. For example no matter how much food generation and population you have, at a certain point building progression is blocked until you get an iron industry set up. Same later for science. Science becomes the critical pinch point to manage. So there's a guarantee that the resource juggling game continues to be relevant.

Revisited in early 2026 but the fun only lasted an hour or two. I feel like I've solved the game because there's no actual tension in expanding the city. Plunking roads down is easy to link up various parts. Other than an abstract system of "Connection" to model traffic there's no meat to the simulation. It makes me appreciate how much the traffic model contributes to [[Cities - Skylines Remastered]].