---
Name: Wizardry - Proving Grounds of the Mad Overlord
Entry Created: 2024-06-01
Genre:
  - RPG
tags:
  - game
aliases:
  - Wizardry
---
I don’t know exactly how to bucketize this game. It’s not a remaster -- the original Wizardry shares nothing with this game from an art and sound perspective. Remaster in the current parlance means something like a fresh set of textures and maybe a resolution upgrade. It’s not a remake, because it’s slavishly faithful to the original. The included quality of life features amount to minor tweaks to unclear text or toggle options that seem like they will marginally reduce grinding. There is an improved in-game map option but it basically replaces the need for graph paper. This is also not a reimplementation, because it’s built on the bones of the original. The underlying systems are, as far as I can tell, identical. The game even shows a representation at all times of what the old interface would have looked like in any given moment. Essentially, this version of the game has simply taken the 1981 original through a wormhole and plopped it into 2024.

I can’t emphasize enough how transformative it is to have the original interface present every step of the way. It intuitively ties together how the new relates to the old. You can peer through the wormhole backwards. Your modern sensibilities are satisfied looking at the smooth animations and the modernized UI and yet you see underneath exactly what a player in 1981 saw. You look at the wireframe representation of the world and understand that what you see with 3D graphics in 2024 is exactly what a player in 1981 saw in their mind’s eye. There is enough friction in the menu-based UI to feel true, married with juuuuust enough sanded edges to make it palatable. It’s extraordinary how well this needle was threaded.

Would the game work as a fresh release today? Maybe. It does have a polish and slickness that ooze with the care with which this version was developed. The crunchy stat sheets and… Infinity Engine portraits? work in today’s world at the same time that they call back to a different era. I am in mind of the “not as it truly was, but as you remember it” sort of approach. Perhaps that’s exactly what this game is doing, and doing better than anything I’ve every played that truly tried to bottle this phenomenon. This is exactly the experience that the theoretical you played in 1981, even though it’s not actually the same game you played. As a modern game though, I’m not sure the exploration is enjoyable. I haven’t fully mapped the first floor yet but I’m appropriately bewildered. I do love how the map spell simply gives you your position and facing. There’s something cruel about a non-randomized dungeon but where your map knowledge resets each time you step outside of the Maze. In 1981 I would have played this in front of a computer with a pad of graph paper. Now, on console, there’s got to be some kind of concession to give me that experience. Etrian Odyssey did this the hands-down best because of the 3DS and its stylus-aided lower screen for drawing your own map. Dumapic does appear to build a map over multiple casts and multiple trips down the dungeon. I like how opening a door presents a very high chance of encounter. And in at least one case, there was a secret door on the modern layer that I knew about because it was a regular door in the classic layer.

I am concerned that this game won’t be a commercial success. Again here, the inclusion of the original interface makes it front-and-center that you’re playing a game from over 40 years ago (over 40 years ago! how is this possible?), but if a player with no interest in that history happens upon the game they are very likely to find it lacking. The Steam page for this game shows positive (score of ~90%) reviews. However, there are only a little over 500 of those reviews. Baldur’s Gate 3 has over 500,000 reviews. So by a very rough metric, [[Baldur’s Gate 3]] is a thousand times more played and, most importantly, purchased.

My primary purpose in playing this was for historical knowledge. Wizardry is the ur-text for the computer dungeon crawler. It’s clearly built systemically on the D&D model (lower numbers mean better AC, damage numbers are represented as polyhedral die rolls, Vancian magic, stats capped at 18, etc.). So much flowered out of this game though. I’ve heard that Dragon Quest drew inspiration from Wizardry. It’s intuitively clear that things like Etrian Odyssey stand in this tradition. And I personally remember the DOS game [[Moraff’s World]] and now see that it didn’t spring fully formed from the head of Zeus.

I almost didn’t take the plunge on this game. It would have been criminal to miss it.